Basic Navigation Commands:
h – Move left (1 character).

j – Move down (1 line).

k – Move up (1 line).

l – Move right (1 character).

w – Move to the beginning of the next word.

e – Move to the end of the current or next word.

b – Move backward to the previous word.

0 – Move to the beginning of the line.

$ – Move to the end of the line.

gg – Go to the beginning of the document.

G – Go to the end of the document.

{ – Move to the previous paragraph.

} – Move to the next paragraph.

Ctrl-f – Move one page forward.

Ctrl-b – Move one page backward.

Ctrl-d – Scroll down half a page.

Ctrl-u – Scroll up half a page.

Ctrl-e – Scroll down one line.

Ctrl-y – Scroll up one line.

Editing Commands:
i – Enter insert mode before the cursor.

I – Enter insert mode at the beginning of the line.

a – Enter insert mode after the cursor.

A – Enter insert mode at the end of the line.

o – Open a new line below the current line and enter insert mode.

O – Open a new line above the current line and enter insert mode.

r – Replace a single character under the cursor.

R – Replace multiple characters (enter overwrite mode).

x – Delete a single character under the cursor.

X – Delete a character before the cursor.

dw – Delete a word.

d$ – Delete from the cursor to the end of the line.

d0 – Delete from the cursor to the beginning of the line.

dd – Delete the current line.

dG – Delete from the current line to the end of the document.

dgg – Delete from the current line to the beginning of the document.

yy – Yank (copy) the current line.

y$ – Yank from the cursor to the end of the line.

yw – Yank the current word.

p – Paste the last yanked or deleted text after the cursor.

P – Paste the last yanked or deleted text before the cursor.

u – Undo the last action.

Ctrl-r – Redo the last undone action.

. – Repeat the last edit command.

c – Change (replace) text from the cursor forward.

C – Change (replace) text from the cursor to the end of the line.

Visual Mode Commands:
v – Enter visual mode (character selection).

V – Enter visual mode (line selection).

Ctrl-v – Enter block visual mode (column selection).

y – Yank (copy) the selected text.

d – Delete the selected text.

c – Change the selected text.

> – Indent the selected text.

< – Un-indent the selected text.

Search and Replace:
/pattern – Search for pattern forward in the document.

?pattern – Search for pattern backward in the document.

n – Move to the next match of the search.

N – Move to the previous match of the search.

:%s/old/new/g – Replace all occurrences of old with new in the entire document.

:s/old/new/g – Replace all occurrences of old with new in the current line.

:s/old/new/gc – Replace all occurrences of old with new, with confirmation for each replacement.

File Operations:
:w – Save (write) the file.

:w filename – Save the file as filename.

:q – Quit vi.

:q! – Quit vi without saving changes.

:wq – Save and quit vi.

:x – Same as :wq (save and quit).

:e filename – Open filename in the editor.

:r filename – Read the contents of filename into the current document.

:w filename – Write the current document to filename.

:!command – Run a shell command (! is used to escape to the shell).

:sh – Open a shell inside vi.

:qall – Quit all open files.

:wa – Write all files.

:e! – Reopen the current file, discarding changes.

Window and Split Commands:
:split – Split the window horizontally into two.

:vsplit – Split the window vertically into two.

Ctrl-w w – Switch between windows.

Ctrl-w h – Move to the left window.

Ctrl-w j – Move to the bottom window.

Ctrl-w k – Move to the top window.

Ctrl-w l – Move to the right window.

:resize – Resize the current window.

:vertical resize – Resize the current vertical split window.

Ctrl-w = – Make all windows equal size.

Undo and Redo Commands:
u – Undo the last change.

Ctrl-r – Redo the last undone change.

:earlier 5m – Go back 5 minutes in the undo history.

:later 5m – Go forward 5 minutes in the undo history.

Command-line Mode Commands:
:set number – Display line numbers.

:set nonumber – Hide line numbers.

:set relativenumber – Show relative line numbers.

:set tabstop=4 – Set tab width to 4 spaces.

:set shiftwidth=4 – Set indentation width to 4 spaces.

:set expandtab – Convert tabs to spaces.

:set noexpandtab – Use actual tab characters.

:set autoindent – Enable automatic indentation.

:set smartindent – Enable smart indentation.

:set wrap – Enable line wrapping.

:set nowrap – Disable line wrapping.

:set showmatch – Highlight matching parentheses and brackets.

:set hlsearch – Highlight search results.

:set incsearch – Show search results as you type.

:set ignorecase – Ignore case when searching.

:set smartcase – Use case-sensitive search if uppercase letters are used in the pattern.

:set mouse=a – Enable mouse support.

:set cursorline – Highlight the current line.

:set list – Show invisible characters like spaces and tabs.

:set nocursorline – Turn off cursor line highlighting.

:set relativenumber – Show relative line numbers.

Other Commands and Settings:
:help – Open help documentation.

:help command – Get help for a specific command.

:map – Show all key mappings.

:unmap – Unmap a key.

Ctrl-c – Exit insert mode.

Ctrl-[ – Exit insert mode (same as Esc).

:normal command – Run a normal mode command while in command-line mode.

:normal! command – Run a normal mode command in an "un-interrupted" way.

Advanced Commands:
:argdo command – Execute a command on all files in the argument list.

:bufdo command – Execute a command on all open buffers.

:tabnew – Open a new tab.

:tabnext – Switch to the next tab.

:tabprevious – Switch to the previous tab.

:tabnew filename – Open a file in a new tab.
